Add new AI blog (#33129)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_posts/2024-06-07-ai-agents-for-the-smart-home.markdown

---
layout: post
title: "AI agents for the smart home"
description: "AI is all the hype and everyone is adding it to everything. We did our research and decided to focus on enabling experimentation."
date: 2024-06-07 00:00:01
date_formatted: "June 07, 2024"
author: Paulus Schoutsen
comments: true
categories: Public-Service-Announcement
og_image: /images/blog/2024-06-ai-agents-for-the-smart-home/art.jpg
---

> <img src='/images/blog/2024-06-ai-agents-for-the-smart-home/art.jpg' style='border: 0;box-shadow: none;'>

Reviewer: The bot is right here, we should add an alt text

Instead, we are focussing our efforts on allowing anyone to play with AI in Home Assistant by making it easier to integrate it into existing workflows and run the models locally. To experiment with AI today, the latest release of Home Assistant allows you to connect and control devices with OpenAI or Google AI. For the local AI solutions of the future, we are [working with NVIDIA](#ai-agents), who have made amazing progress already. This will unleash the power of our community, our collective intelligence, to come up with creative use cases.

Read more about our approach, how you can use AI today, and what the future holds. Or jump straight in and add [Google AI](/integrations/google_generative_ai_conversation/), [OpenAI](/integrations/openai_conversation/) to your Home Assistant installation (or [Ollama](/integrations/ollama) for local AI without the ability to control HA yet).

> _Huge thanks to our AI team [@shulyaka <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://github.com/Shulyaka), [@tronikos <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://github.com/tronikos), [@allenporter <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://github.com/allenporter), [@synesthesiam <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://github.com/synesthesiam), [@jlpuffier <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://github.com/jlpouffier) and [@balloob <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://github.com/balloob)._

Reviewer: We avoided the term "AI team" in the release notes as well. 

We shouldn't make this appear as an official team or exclusive club. Everyone should be feeling free to step up and help out.

```suggestion
_Huge thanks for contributing: [@shulyaka <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://github.com/Shulyaka), [@tronikos <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://github.com/tronikos), [@allenporter <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://github.com/allenporter), [@synesthesiam <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://github.com/synesthesiam), [@jlpuffier <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://github.com/jlpouffier) and [@balloob <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://github.com/balloob)._
```

Using agents in Assist allows you to tell Home Assistant what to do, without having to worry if that exact command sentence is understood. Even combining commands and referencing previous commands will work!

And because this is _just_ Assist, it works on [Android](/blog/2023/07/20/year-of-the-voice-chapter-3/), [iOS](/blog/2024/05/22/companion-app-for-ios-20245-assist/#assist-on-ios), [classic landline phones](/voice_control/worlds-most-private-voice-assistant/), and [$13 voice satellites](/voice_control/thirteen-usd-voice-remote/) 😁

<p class="img"><img src='/images/blog/2024-06-ai-agents-for-the-smart-home/01-assist.png'/>LLMs allow Assist to understand a wider variety of commands.</p>

The architecture that allows LLMs to control Home Assistant is, as one expects from us, fully customizable. The default API is based on Assist, focuses on voice control, and can be extended using intents [defined in YAML](/integrations/intent_script/) or [written in Python](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/intent_handling) ([examples below](#defining-the-api-for-llms)).

> The current API that we offer is just one approach, and depending on the LLM model used, might not be the best one. That's why it is architected to allow custom integrations to [provide their own LLM APIs](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/core/llm/). This allows experimentation with different types of tasks, like creating automations. All LLM integrations in Home Assistant can be configured to use any of the registered custom APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current API that we offer is just one approach, and depending on the LLM model used, it might not be the best one. That's why it is architected to allow custom integrations to [provide their own LLM APIs](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/core/llm/). This allows experimentation with different types of tasks, like creating automations. All LLM integrations in Home Assistant can be configured using any registered custom APIs.
```

<p class="img"><img src='/images/blog/2024-06-ai-agents-for-the-smart-home/02-options.png'/>The options screen for an AI agent allows you to pick the Home Assistant API that it has access to.</p>

The options screen for an AI agent allows you to pick the Home Assistant API that it has access to.

## Cloud versus local

> Home Assistant currently offers two cloud LLM providers with various model options: Google and OpenAI. Both integrations ship with a recommended model that balances price, accuracy and speed. Our recommended model for OpenAI is better at non-home related questions but Google's model is 14x cheaper, yet has similar voice assistant performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Home Assistant currently offers two cloud LLM providers with various model options: Google and OpenAI. Both integrations ship with a recommended model that balances price, accuracy, and speed. Our recommended model for OpenAI is better at non-home related questions but Google's model is 14x cheaper, yet has similar voice assistant performance.
```

To improve local AI options for Home Assistant, we have been collaborating with NVIDIA's [Jetson AI Lab Research Group <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://www.jetson-ai-lab.com/research.html), and there has been tremendous progress. They have published text-to-speech and speech-to-text engines with [support for our Wyoming Protocol <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://github.com/dusty-nv/jetson-containers/tree/78159ca37d3195afdade81688e22a34cd7a89dbc/packages/smart-home/wyoming), added [support for Ollama to their Jetson platform <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://github.com/dusty-nv/jetson-containers/tree/dev/packages/llm/ollama) and just last week showed their progress on making a local Llama 3 model control Home Assistant:

<lite-youtube videoid="aq7QS9AtwE8" videotitle="The first 5 minutes Dustin shows his prototype of controlling Home Assistant using a local LLM."></lite-youtube>

> <p style="text-align: center;"><i>The first 5 minutes Dustin shows his prototype of controlling Home Assistant using a local LLM.</i></p>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<p style="text-align: center;"><i>The first 5 minutes, Dustin shows his prototype of controlling Home Assistant using a local LLM.</i></p>
```

Reviewer: Why is this one styled with HTML?

Author: I was having issues with using both italics with a center, so I resorted to HTML.

## What is AI?

> The current wave of AI hype evolves around large language models (LLMs) which are created by ingesting huge amounts of data. When you run these models, you give it text and it will predict the next words. If you give it a question as input, the generated next words will be the answer. To make it a bit smarter, AI companies will layer API access to other services on top, allowing the LLM to do mathematics or integrate web searches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current wave of AI hype evolves around large language models (LLMs), which are created by ingesting huge amounts of data. When you run these models, you give it text and it will predict the next words. If you give it a question as input, the generated next words will be the answer. To make it a bit smarter, AI companies will layer API access to other services on top, allowing the LLM to do mathematics or integrate web searches.
```

Another downside is that depending on the AI model and where it runs, it can be very slow to generate an answer. This means that using an LLM to generate voice responses is currently either expensive or terribly slow. We cannot expect a user to wait 8 seconds for the light to be turned on when using their voice.

## AI Agents

Last January, the most upvoted article on HackerNews was about controlling Home Assistant using an LLM. [I commented on the story <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=38985152) to share our excitement for LLMs and the things we plan to do with it. In response to that comment, Nigel Nelson and Sean Huver, two ML engineers from the NVIDIA Holoscan team, reached out to share some of their experience to help Home Assistant. It evolved around AI agents.

AI agents are programs that run independently. Users, or other programs, can interact with it to ask it things like describe an image, answer a question or control your home. In this case, the agents are powered by LLM models and the way the agent responds is steered by instructions in natural language (English!).

> Nigel and Sean had experimented with AI being responsible for multiple tasks. Their tests showed that giving a single agent complicated instructions, so it could handle multiple tasks, led to the AI model being confused. One didn't cut it, you need multiple AI agents responsible for one task each to do things right. If an incoming query can be handled by multiple agents, a selector agent approach ensures the query is sent to the right agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AI agents are programs that run independently. Users or other programs can interact with them to ask them to describe an image, answer a question, or control your home. In this case, the agents are powered by LLM models, and the way the agent responds is steered by instructions in natural language (English!).

Nigel and Sean had experimented with AI being responsible for multiple tasks. Their tests showed that giving a single agent complicated instructions so it could handle multiple tasks confused the AI model. One didn't cut it, you need multiple AI agents responsible for one task each to do things right. If an incoming query can be handled by multiple agents, a selector agent approach ensures the query is sent to the right agent.
```

<p class="img"><img src='/images/blog/2024-06-ai-agents-for-the-smart-home/05-testing.png'/>Results comparing a set of difficult sentences to control Home Assistant between Home Assistant's sentence matching, Google Gemini 1.5 Flash and OpenAI GPT-4o.</p>

We've used these tools extensively to fine tune the prompt and API that we give to LLMs to control Home Assistant. The reproducibility of these studies allows us to change something and repeat the test to see if we can generate better results. We are able to use this to test different prompts, different AI models and any other aspect.

## Defining the API for LLMs

> Home Assistant has different API interfaces. We have the Home Assistant Python object, a WebSocket API, Rest API, and intents. We decided to base our LLM API on the intent system because it is our smallest API. Intents are used by our sentence-matching voice assistant and are limited to controlling devices and querying information. They don't bother with creating automations, managing devices, and other administrative tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Home Assistant has different API interfaces. We have the Home Assistant Python object, a WebSocket API, a REST API, and intents. We decided to base our LLM API on the intent system because it is our smallest API. Intents are used by our sentence-matching voice assistant and are limited to controlling devices and querying information. They don't bother with creating automations, managing devices, or other administrative tasks.
```

> Leveraging intents also meant that we already have a place in the UI where users can configure what entities are accessible, a test suite in many languages matching sentences to intent and a baseline of what the LLM should be able to achieve with the API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Leveraging intents also meant that we already have a place in the UI where you can configure what entities are accessible, a test suite in many languages matching sentences to intent, and a baseline of what the LLM should be able to achieve with the API.
```

<img src='/images/blog/2024-06-ai-agents-for-the-smart-home/06-expose.png' alt='Home Assistant Conference header' class='no-shadow'>

> Home Assistant already has different ways for a user to define their own intents, and this allows users to extend the Assist API that LLMs have access to. The first one is the [intent script integration](/integrations/intent_script/). Using YAML, users can define a script to run when the intent is invoked and use a template to define the response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Home Assistant already has different ways for you to define your own intents, allowing you to extend the Assist API to which LLMs have access. The first one is the [intent script integration](/integrations/intent_script/). Using YAML, users can define a script to run when the intent is invoked and use a template to define the response.
```

> {% highlight python %}

Reviewer: Please us just markdown here

{% raw %}
intent_script:
  EventCountToday:
    action:
      - service: calendar.get_events
        target:
          entity_id: calendar.my_calendar
        data_template:
          start_date_time: "{{ today_at('00:00') }}"
          duration: { "hours": 24 }
        response_variable: result
      - stop: ""
        response_variable: result
    speech:
      text: "{{ action_response['calendar.my_calendar'].events | length }} events"
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}

> We haven't forgotten about custom components either. They can [register their own intents](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/intent_handling) or even better: define their own API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We haven't forgotten about custom components either. They can [register their own intents](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/intent_handling) or, even better, define their own API.
```

### Custom integrations providing their own LLM APIs

The built-in LLM API is focused on simplicity and being good at the things that it does. The larger the API surface, the easier AI models, especially the smaller ones, can get confused and invoke them incorrectly.

> So instead of one large API, we are aiming for many focused APIs. An AI agent will only have access to one API at a time to ensure it has a higher success rate. It will require experimentation to figure out the best API for creating automations, querying the history, and maybe even creating dashboards. When all those APIs are in place, we can start playing with a selector agent that routes incoming requests to the right agent and API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of one large API, we are aiming for many focused APIs. To ensure a higher success rate, an AI agent will only have access to one API at a time. Figuring out the best API for creating automations, querying the history, and maybe even creating dashboards will require experimentation. When all those APIs are in place, we can start playing with a selector agent that routes incoming requests to the right agent and API.
```

To find out what APIs work best is a task we need to do as a community. That's why we have designed our API system in a way that [any custom component can provide them](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/core/llm/). When configuring an LLM that supports control of Home Assistant, users can pick any of the available APIs.

Custom LLM APIs are written in Python. When a user talks to an LLM, the API is asked to give a collection of tools for the LLM to access, and a partial prompt that will be appended to the user prompt. The partial prompt can provide extra instructions for the LLM on when and how to use the tools.

## Future research

> One thing we can do to improve AI in Home Assistant is wait. LLMs, both local and remotely accessible ones, are improving rapidly and new ones are released regularly (fun fact, I started writing this post before GPT4o and Gemini 1.5 were announced). Wait a couple of months and the new Llama, Gemini or GPT release might unlock many new possibilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One thing we can do to improve AI in Home Assistant is wait. LLMs, both local and remotely accessible ones, are improving rapidly and new ones are released regularly (fun fact, I started writing this post before GPT4o and Gemini 1.5 were announced). Wait a couple of months and the new Llama, Gemini, or GPT release might unlock many new possibilities.
```

> We're going to continue to collaborate with NVIDIA to enable more local AI functionalities. High on our list is making local LLM with function calling easily accessible to all Home Assistant users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll continue to collaborate with NVIDIA to enable more local AI functionalities. High on our list is making local LLM with function calling easily accessible to all Home Assistant users.
```

> There is also room for us to improve the local models we use. We want to explore fine-tuning a model for specific tasks like voice commands or area summarization. This would allow us to get away with much smaller models with better performance and reliability. And the best thing about our community? [People are already working on this](https://huggingface.co/acon96/Home-3B-v3-GGUF).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is also room for us to improve the local models we use. We want to explore fine-tuning a model for specific tasks like voice commands or area summarization. This would allow us to get away with much smaller models with better performance and reliability. And the best thing about our community? [People are already working on this](https://github.com/acon96/home-llm).
```

> There is also room for us to improve the local models we use. We want to explore fine tuning a model for specific tasks like voice commands or area summarization. This would allow us to get away with much smaller models with better performance and reliability. And the best thing about our community? [People are already working on this <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://huggingface.co/acon96/Home-3B-v3-GGUF).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is also room for us to improve the local models we use. We want to explore fine-tuning a model for specific tasks like voice commands or area summarization. This would allow us to get away with much smaller models with better performance and reliability. And the best thing about our community? [People are already working on this <i class="icon-external-link"></i>](https://huggingface.co/acon96/Home-3B-v3-GGUF).
```

> We also want to see if we can use RAG to allow users to teach LLMs about personal items or people that it cares about. Wouldn't it be great if Home Assistant could help you find your glasses?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also want to see if we can use RAG to allow users to teach LLMs about personal items or people that they care about. Wouldn't it be great if Home Assistant could help you find your glasses?
```
